README.md, before:

Noisebridge Flaschen Taschen Project
====================================


<a href="https://noisebridge.net/wiki/Flaschen_Taschen"><img src="img/flaschen-taschen-logo.png"></a>

Software and Raspberry Pi interface hardware for [FlaschenTaschen].

FlaschenTaschen is inspired by projects such as the [Muro de botellas]
or [MateLight]. A bunch of us have seen Mate Light in action at [32c3] and got
excited :)
So our Noisebridge interpretation of it has a German influenced name.

Unfortunately, in the US, bottle reuse is not at all a thing, so there
are no standardized crates with bottles you can buy.
So we use milk crates (which is a thing) and put common, clear 12oz (355ml)
bottles in (Mate, Corona,..) inside. Wrapped in aluminum foil, they
make nice pixels.

![](./img/ft-work-in-progress.jpg)

In [this video][2025-video], you see a test-setup with 5x4 creates (25x20 pixel).

Final set-up will be 9 crates wide and 7 crates high for a total of 63 crates
with 25 'pixels' each. 45x35 pixels or 1575 pixels total. All operated by
a Raspberry Pi that provides a [network API][protocols] to update the display.

Current stage: we have received all the LEDs, but are still in the process of aquiring bottles
and crates. We are now starting to wire up the crates; if you want to help, check out
[the documentation](./doc/wiring.md).
<a href="doc/wiring.md"><img src="img/crate-descriptions.jpg" height="80px"></a>

## Tutorial: getting started

To develop visuals for the FlaschenTaschen display once it is ready, here you
can already play around writing software that updates the networked display.
(If you're running a Mac, switch to `mac-os-compilable` branch as it has some
Linux specifics removed).

#### 1. Check out the project

```bash
$ git clone --recursive https://github.com/hzeller/flaschen-taschen.git
$ cd flaschen-taschen
```

Make sure to use the `--recursive` flag, as there are sub-modules to check
out. If you forgot that, type

```
$ git submodule update --init
```

in the `flaschen-taschen/` directory.

#### 2. Compile and run local server
In one terminal, go to the [server/](./server) directory, compile the
terminal-based display and run it. Make sure to have it large enough to show
all pixels:

```
$ cd server
$ make FT_BACKEND=terminal
$ ./ft-server   #  this will now show a black 'screen'
```

If you want to dig into details and understand the various server
implementations, check out the [server README](./server/README.md).

#### 3. Run client programs
In another terminal, go to the [client/](./client) directory, compile
the programs and run it.

```
$ cd client
$ make simple-animation
$ ./simple-animation localhost # <- network address of display.
```

Easiest to get started with the programming is
to read the [simple-example.cc](./client/simple-example.cc) code, then move on
to [simple-animation.cc](./client/simple-animation.cc).

If you want to implement the simple network protocol in another language
[check out the protocol description](./doc/protocols.md) or look at the
[C++ implementation](./client/udp-flaschen-taschen.cc)

For some immediate fun, send a PPM image to your server. Since the server
already understands that format natively, you can unleash the usual
[netpbm] toolbox for image manipulation:

```
bash$ jpegtopnm myimage.jpg | pnmscale -xysize 45 35 > /dev/udp/localhost/1337
```

For a tool that decodes images (including animated gifs), compile `send-image`
(`make send-image`, see
[Send-Image section in client/](./client/README.md#send-image) for needed
dependencies), then run
`./send-image -h localhost some-image.png` which reads images and
sends them to the FlaschenTaschen display.

<a href="server/#terminal"><img src="img/terminal-screenshot.png" width="200px"></a>

## Connecting LED strips to the Pi

LED strips are controlled by a Raspberry Pi, connected via
a [custom level shifter](./hardware) for up to 16 strips (of which we only
use 9 for our installation right now):

<a href="hardware/"><img src="img/pi-adapter-pcb.png" width="200px"></a>

[FlaschenTaschen]: https://noisebridge.net/wiki/Flaschen_Taschen
[Muro de botellas]: http://www.zuloark.com/muro-de-botellas/
[MateLight]: https://github.com/jaseg/matelight
[RGB Matrix Adapter]: https://github.com/hzeller/rpi-rgb-led-matrix/tree/master/adapter/active-3
[32c3]: https://events.ccc.de/congress/2015/wiki/Static:Main_Page
[protocols]: ./doc/protocols.md
[netpbm]: http://netpbm.sourceforge.net/
[2025-video]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hs8FoROzE4M

Commit message:

o Tell about the obsolecence of this branch.

README.md, after:


===================================================================================
Please use the master branch: it works now on MacOS, no need for this mac-os-compilable branch anymore
===================================================================================

Noisebridge Flaschen Taschen Project
====================================


<a href="https://noisebridge.net/wiki/Flaschen_Taschen"><img src="img/flaschen-taschen-logo.png"></a>

Software and Raspberry Pi interface hardware for [FlaschenTaschen].

FlaschenTaschen is inspired by projects such as the [Muro de botellas]
or [MateLight]. A bunch of us have seen Mate Light in action at [32c3] and got
excited :)
So our Noisebridge interpretation of it has a German influenced name.

Unfortunately, in the US, bottle reuse is not at all a thing, so there
are no standardized crates with bottles you can buy.
So we use milk crates (which is a thing) and put common, clear 12oz (355ml)
bottles in (Mate, Corona,..) inside. Wrapped in aluminum foil, they
make nice pixels.

![](./img/ft-work-in-progress.jpg)

In [this video][2025-video], you see a test-setup with 5x4 creates (25x20 pixel).

Final set-up will be 9 crates wide and 7 crates high for a total of 63 crates
with 25 'pixels' each. 45x35 pixels or 1575 pixels total. All operated by
a Raspberry Pi that provides a [network API][protocols] to update the display.

Current stage: we have received all the LEDs, but are still in the process of aquiring bottles
and crates. We are now starting to wire up the crates; if you want to help, check out
[the documentation](./doc/wiring.md).
<a href="doc/wiring.md"><img src="img/crate-descriptions.jpg" height="80px"></a>

## Tutorial: getting started

To develop visuals for the FlaschenTaschen display once it is ready, here you
can already play around writing software that updates the networked display.
(If you're running a Mac, switch to `mac-os-compilable` branch as it has some
Linux specifics removed).

#### 1. Check out the project

```bash
$ git clone --recursive https://github.com/hzeller/flaschen-taschen.git
$ cd flaschen-taschen
```

Make sure to use the `--recursive` flag, as there are sub-modules to check
out. If you forgot that, type

```
$ git submodule update --init
```

in the `flaschen-taschen/` directory.

#### 2. Compile and run local server
In one terminal, go to the [server/](./server) directory, compile the
terminal-based display and run it. Make sure to have it large enough to show
all pixels:

```
$ cd server
$ make FT_BACKEND=terminal
$ ./ft-server   #  this will now show a black 'screen'
```

If you want to dig into details and understand the various server
implementations, check out the [server README](./server/README.md).

#### 3. Run client programs
In another terminal, go to the [client/](./client) directory, compile
the programs and run it.

```
$ cd client
$ make simple-animation
$ ./simple-animation localhost # <- network address of display.
```

Easiest to get started with the programming is
to read the [simple-example.cc](./client/simple-example.cc) code, then move on
to [simple-animation.cc](./client/simple-animation.cc).

If you want to implement the simple network protocol in another language
[check out the protocol description](./doc/protocols.md) or look at the
[C++ implementation](./client/udp-flaschen-taschen.cc)

For some immediate fun, send a PPM image to your server. Since the server
already understands that format natively, you can unleash the usual
[netpbm] toolbox for image manipulation:

```
bash$ jpegtopnm myimage.jpg | pnmscale -xysize 45 35 > /dev/udp/localhost/1337
```

For a tool that decodes images (including animated gifs), compile `send-image`
(`make send-image`, see
[Send-Image section in client/](./client/README.md#send-image) for needed
dependencies), then run
`./send-image -h localhost some-image.png` which reads images and
sends them to the FlaschenTaschen display.

<a href="server/#terminal"><img src="img/terminal-screenshot.png" width="200px"></a>

## Connecting LED strips to the Pi

LED strips are controlled by a Raspberry Pi, connected via
a [custom level shifter](./hardware) for up to 16 strips (of which we only
use 9 for our installation right now):

<a href="hardware/"><img src="img/pi-adapter-pcb.png" width="200px"></a>

[FlaschenTaschen]: https://noisebridge.net/wiki/Flaschen_Taschen
[Muro de botellas]: http://www.zuloark.com/muro-de-botellas/
[MateLight]: https://github.com/jaseg/matelight
[RGB Matrix Adapter]: https://github.com/hzeller/rpi-rgb-led-matrix/tree/master/adapter/active-3
[32c3]: https://events.ccc.de/congress/2015/wiki/Static:Main_Page
[protocols]: ./doc/protocols.md
[netpbm]: http://netpbm.sourceforge.net/
[2025-video]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hs8FoROzE4M
